{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red38\green38\blue38;\red135\green135\blue135;\red11\green78\blue157;
\red52\green52\blue52;\red127\green127\blue127;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{none\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'00;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww51000\viewh25640\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc\partightenfactor0

\fs92 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The Opioid Crackdown: Have We Gone Too Far? Part III
\fs24 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 Nov. 21, 2017   by  Anne M. Fletcher\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\fs22 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Part three of this series examines what happens when government 
\i guidelines
\i0  and 
\i recommendations
\i0  such those in as the {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/rr/rr6501e1er.htm"}}{\fldrslt 
\i \cf4 CDC Guideline for Prescribing Opioids for Chronic Pain}} are used to make rules and regulations about medications that leave little or no room for physicians\'92 discretion and individual patient needs. How does this impact people who depend on these medications to avoid suffering and have a decent quality of life?\
In a {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JOFDotetvCQ"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 medical presentation}}, addiction expert, primary care physician, and researcher, Stefan Kertesz, M.D. from the University of Alabama, Birmingham, said he believes that the 2016 \'93{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.cdc.gov/drugoverdose/prescribing/guideline.html"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 CDC Guideline for Prescribing Opioids for Chronic Pain}}\'94 \'96 \'93the manifest\'94 now guiding medical use of opioid medications for chronic pain \'96 is \'93mostly sound\'94 and \'93a relatively high quality product.\'94 However, he expressed great concern about \'93emerging practices that defy the CDC Guideline, misconstrue epidemiology, misunderstand the complexity of what causes addiction, and suspend our customary rules of medical decision-making.\'94 He added, \'93Ethical expectations that are core to being a health provider are being violated in the care of pain patients.\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Are Universal Opioid Prescription Cut-Offs Stipulated?\cf3 \
Dr. Kertesz is talking about\
such practices as establishing \'93cut-offs\'94 or strict upper limits when prescribing opioids. Even though the CDC Guideline makes no such stipulations and has no authority to restrict prescribing, it appears that a growing number of medical facilities and physicians have interpreted its recommendation concerning dosages that way. (To be able to compare dosages of different opioids in like units, all opioids can be converted to an equivalent of one medication, morphine, using a {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www1.nyc.gov/site/doh/providers/health-topics/mme-calculator.page"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 morphine equivalent dose calculator}} to calculate \'93morphine milligram equivalents\'94 or MME/day.)\
\
To illustrate his concerns, Kertesz showed a photo of an actual flyer from a doctor\'92s office that reads (literally), \'93Beginning February 2017 Morphine Equivalency Dosing WILL decrease until CDC guidelines are met by June 2017. Target is 90 mg of Morphine equivalency per day, or less. All medication adjustments will be based on this new clinic policy.\'94\
\
What does the CDC Guideline, in fact, say? Pointing out that the higher the dosage, the higher the risk of overdose death from opioids, its recommendation does recommend special caution at total daily dose thresholds of 50 to 90 MME. As an upper limit it specifies that clinicians should avoid increasing opioid daily dosages to no more than the equivalent of 90 MME. Yet it adds, 
\i \'93or carefully justify a decision to titrate dosage to more than that.\'94
\i0  Note the the 
\i leeway
\i0  for physicians to use their judgment about higher dosages in consideration of 
\i individual
\i0  patients\'92 needs. There\'92s also advice to consider consultation with pain specialists. ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2017/08/23/543955887/intent-on-reversing-its-opioid-epidemic-a-state-limits-prescriptions"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 Some states}} have their own rules concerning thresholds for opioid prescribing.)
\b0 \
\
Samples of {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.cdc.gov/drugoverdose/pdf/calculating_total_daily_dose-a.pdf"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 opioid medications and daily doses that add up to 90 MMD/day:}}\cf4 \
\cf3 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0\cf5 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 		\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
90 mg of hydrocodone (9 tablets of hydrocodone/acetaminophen 10/325)\
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 		\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
60 mg of oxycodone (~2 tablets of oxycodone sustained-release 30 mg)\
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 		\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
~20 mg of methadone (4 tablets of methadone 5 mg)\
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 		\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\b \cf3 Be aware, too, that as the CDC Guideline acknowledged, dosage recommendations reflect limited scientific evidence. Kertesz emphatically concludes, \'93When you make morphine equivalency guidelines mandatory, it\'92s in violation of the CDC guidelines.\'94 (See box below on the voluntary nature of the Guideline.)
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\fs36 \cf3 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\b\fs22 \cf2 I\
\
Introduction, 2016\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/rr/rr6501e1er.htm"}}{\fldrslt 
\i \cf4 CDC Guideline for Prescribing Opioids for Chronic Pain}}
\i \cf4 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\fs36 \cf4 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\i0\fs22 \cf2 People Already on Opioids for Chronic Pain
\i \cf4 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\i0 \cf6 Accord to {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.cnn.com/2017/07/17/health/chronic-pain-opioid-tapering-study/index.html"}}{\fldrslt 
\i \cf4 an article on CNN.com}}\cf4  \cf3 early this year, \'93\'85when the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention established new guidelines on prescribing opioids, it recommended that long-term opioid users be weaned or tapered off pain pills.\'94\'a0
\i In fact, it did no such thing.    \cf4 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\i0 \cf3 The reporter went on to cite a recently published review of the scientific literature in the prestigious {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://annals.org/aim/fullarticle/2643842/patient-outcomes-dose-reduction-discontinuation-long-term-opioid-therapy-systematic"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 Annals of Internal Medicine}} on dose reduction or discontinuation of long-term opioid therapy for chronic pain and concluded that it found that chronic pain patients who taper off opioids can have a better quality of life. The authors actually concluded, \'93
\i Very low quality evidence
\i0  suggests that\'85 pain, function, and quality of life may improve with opioid dose reduction.\'94 Of the 67 studies they reviewed, the authors considered only three to be of \'93good\'94 quality.\
\
When I asked him how a review like this even got published, one prominent physician [who chooses not to be named] stated, \'93It\'92s bias, pure and simple. The zeitgeist often influences what gets published. Go against it, you\'92ll meet resistance. Go with it, normal objectivity goes out the window. The push against opioid medications is a moral crusade.\'94\
\
Here is what the CDC Guideline 
\i does
\i0  state concerning patients with chronic pain (that is, pain continuing or expected to continue more than three months or past the time of normal tissue healing) who have been taking high dosages of opioids on a long-term basis: \'93These patients should be offered the opportunity to re-evaluate their continued use of opioids at high dosages\'85 [They] might consider the possibility of opioid dosage reduction to be anxiety-provoking, and tapering opioids can be especially challenging after years on high dosages because of physical and psychological dependence [not to mention the distress felt from increased pain].\'94 It goes on to say that clinicians should explain \'93in a nonjudgmental manner\'94 that we now have a body of evidence showing that overdose risk is increased at higher dosages, as well as discuss risks and benefits of continued high-dosage opioid use.\
\
For patients who agree to taper opioids, it\'92s advised that clinicians \'93collaborate with patients\'94 on a tapering plan, recognizing that it might require a very slow process so the patient can adjust gradually to lower dosages. (Discontinuation of opioids requires slow tapering in order to prevent miserable withdrawal symptoms. Replacement medications such as buprenorphine can also be used.) Note the spirit of being 
\i non-dictatorial, collaborative, and sensitive
\i0  to the individual patient\'92s needs and desires.\
\
Certainly, some people report benefits from lowering high doses of prescription opioids. An {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.rehabs.com/pro-talk-articles/the-opioid-crackdown-have-we-gone-too-far-part-iii/August%202017%20National%20Public%20Radio%20story"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 August 2017 National Public Radio story}} described a man with multiple painful conditions who kept needing increasing doses of opioids from his physician. Although he got some initial relief with each increase, his pain still persisted. So he worked with his doctor to greatly cut the dose and also saw a psychologist. While he some pain is still present, both his mood and memory have improved.\'a0 As a result, he said his life is \'93infinitely better.\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Harms of Involuntary Opioid Dose Reduction and Physicians\'92 Misinterpretations\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf3 The NPR story cited above quotes a different physician who said, \'93A certain group of people simply cannot come off [opioids.]\'94 However, as suggested earlier, some have no say in having their dosages reduced or even cut off, even when there is no sound reason.\
\
In a {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/medical_examiner/2017/08/cutting_down_on_opioids_has_made_life_miserable_for_chronic_pain_patients.html"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 recent article at Slate.com}}, Dr. Kertesz and {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.twitter.com/@slsatel"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 Sally Satel}}, MD,\'a0a psychiatrist and resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute, said, \'93Every week, one of us receives notice of suicides and overdoses by patients across the country who are distraught in the wake of having their dosages reduced.\'94 They share several stories of people who say they can\'92t live with the pain since being taken off opioids abruptly. One is that of a 53-year-old man whose long-term (since 2001) opioid therapy for multiple problems causing chronic intractable pain was suddenly stopped. The physician was afraid he\'92d lose his medical license. For six weeks, the man searched for help, refusing to pursue illegal drugs. Finally, when his wife was out one day, he went to his back yard and shot himself.\
\
Although the CDC Guideline is meant for primary care physicians, many of them have little idea how to prescribe opioids and, I suspect, haven\'92t studied the recommendations. One young woman with a horribly painful chronic condition that flares up unpredictably has, for some time, been given a relatively small monthly dosage (20 MME) of two different kinds of opioids. One of them is tramadol, which is less tightly controlled than opioids like oxycodone. She told me she recently had a painful \'93attack\'94 and asked her primary care physician for her tramadol prescription four days early. (She knew it was too soon to refill her stronger painkiller.) Her pharmacist at a large national chain indicated that the early refill request violated no policies and would be fine, but needed her physician\'92s okay. But the doctor refused, indicating that an early refill would violate a government guideline. (There is no such guideline.) So the suffering woman had to wait the four days, until the doctor would refill the prescription.\
\
Kertesz and Satel state, \'93Amid\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/health/chronic-pain-patients-feel-sting-of-washington-states-opioid-crackdown/"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 regulations}},\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://medium.com/@StefanKertesz/whats-in-that-opioid-plan-from-cms-72789a64d8e2"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 pharmacy payment restrictions}}, and\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://time.com/4675325/doctors-opioid-epidemic/"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 intimations}}\'a0that doctors are the major culprits in this epidemic, doctors are increasingly sensing pressure to reduce doses, even among patients who are benefiting from the medication and using it responsibly.\'94 (To get a sense of what chronic pain patients face, check out {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://messageboards.webmd.com/health-conditions/f/pain-management/10960/chronic-pain?ecd=wnl_cbp_080317&ctr=wnl-cbp-080317_nsl-promo-v_4&mb=DLFt0YIIs94n%40qGXLgdOnuHnVev1imbCTzagGFgJqyY%3d"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 WebMD\'92s Pain Management message board}}.) Kertesz asserts, \'93Involuntary dose reduction does not improve outcomes. Uncontrolled cessation risks harm and can, in fact, be treacherous.\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\fs36 \cf3 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\fs26 \cf2 The final article in this series will address some common sense ways to address use of opioids for chronic pain as well as the very real problem of opioid addiction and overdoses in this country. It won\'92t include President \cf4 Trump\'92s newly announced suggestion\cf2  that we return to such remedies as Nancy Regan\'92s \'93Just Say No\'94 anti-drug campaign from the 1980s. (How did that work for us?)\
}